# Computer-Science-Capstone-and-Professional-Assessment

# Self Introduction
My name is Ian Viguera Rivera. Since I was very passionate for emerging technologies, mechanical engineering, and programming from early age. The chase for turning a passion to a degree has been a difficult and tedious one, as there has been many challenges along the way. The benefit from these challenges is that it has improved some of the most important skills used in computer science careers, ranging from critical thinking to adaptability. These skills are demonstrated on the enhancement project breakdown, down below, or in my inventory on previous and/or personal projects.

# Professional Self-Assessment
I started chasing my Computer Science degree since 2016. What my young mind though was going to be a smooth-sailed path into a prestigious degree, and then a high-paying career, quickly turned into a challenge. My first lesson in this journey was that challenges are not a disadvantage whatsoever, as they provide guidence and experince that can be used in the present or future. As an example, I remember how one of the most basic programs gave me one of the biggest challenges at the time. At the time, I had trouble with some of the basic computer science topics and how to implement them, making the project not up to my expectations. This challenge served me as a learning experience, and I kept reviewing topics and practicing on the project for my own benefit. This act of perseverance only benefitted my journey, as I implemented the skills learned to other projects and examples simmilar to the previous one. Furthermore the SNHU environment has been of magnificent help and guidance, with an efficient teaching system, and excellent administrative and teaching staff. The appreciation and guidance of such excellent evironment encompassess a major role on my professional upbringing. Overall, my skills on collaborative, technical, and knowledgeable evironments have since grown exponentially. I am now able to construct a backend/frontend digital system with a dedicated database and simplistic UI. It helps that my creativity, ambission, and experience have spawned original ideas that could be of great help for my professional future. Although I have learned the necessary concepts, and became proficient on them, my aim is to keep learning and practicing alongside my professional career to facilitate, adapt, and enhance my future projects.

# Informal Code Review
The informal code review of my artifacts consisted on the description of the functionality, characteristics and overall enhancements on which they could benefit from. Both chosen artifacts, Contact Service and Advising Assistance softwares, were similar enough to merge some of their characteristics under one cohesive web application. To do so, smart software development skills needed to be implemented to enhance its design, data structure, and database management. The conducted code review served as an exemplar guide of the potential that such web application is capable of, and how basic artifacs can be improved to become complete professional digital system. 

# System Design and Engineering
The Contact Service and Advising assistance softwares were basic-to-mildly complex systems that showcased various basic computer engineering topics and strategies. In today's standards, these artifacs are viewed as basic, and somewhat outdated, for the general audience. In a software design aspect, these artifacs can only be utilized under the program's internal console with limited interactivity and command prompts. For this reason, the focus for the design of the applications was to implement interactivity and UI enhancements. The most evident decision  was to completely change the applications' environment and transfer their unique functional characteristics that the artifacts provide. Since the Contact Service software's function was to input and save user information, the best idea to enhance this artifact was to implement it into a web application capable of taking and storing data. Similarly, the Advising Assistance software's 
 most important functionality was to make decisions based on user input. A Java web application system, capable of making appointments, was considered almost instantly due to the immersion of functionality and interactivity that its capable of providing. The artiifacts were successfully enhanced with smart Java function coding, JSP, HTML, and Tomcat tool integration to create a unique web service application.

# Algorithms and Data Structure
In the initial enhancement plan, the objective was to implement algorithms capable of recommending available doctors, times and locations based on user input. As development progressed, focus shifted into a cohesive data structure and management instead of a complex algorithm. The reason behind this decision was due to the fact that for a functional algorithm specific data needs to be addressed, the algorithm needs to be tested profusely, and complex security systems need to be implemented. Due to the limmited time, budget, and resources, this decision would not work correctly. Instead, the focus shifted for a more front-end approach, where the user should expect data return based exactly on the inputted data. In laymans terms, the web application is prepared so that the user make informed decisions based on the prompts coded into the app, swerving away from the app accidentally making any type of wrongful decisions with user sensitive data. The web application is equipped with smart functions that routes data in and out of its dedicated database, protects potential intruders with more complex accessing security measures, and cohesive data organization. This proved to be an ease in user experience, which benefits overall traffic.

# Databases
Before the enhancements implemented on the artifacts, the practice of storing and returning data was limited to specific arranged arrays from specific user inputs. Since this enhanced environment require multiple instances of specific; different data, a database needed to be implemented to provide organizational and security measures alongside an environment capable of expanding storage capacity. MySql provided the necessary tools and functionality capable of satisfying the major components of storage enhancements that were planned from the beggining. The database integration provided excellent organizational skills for different categories from the web application. After successfully connecting the MySql database with the web application, the program was able to save and access "doctor specialties" or service areas, user information, and appointment details. It also provided an extra layer of data security considering that the data requires an username and password to access its contents. 

# Conclusion
Overall, this experience has taught me the necessary aspects of computer science. The skills that I've learned throghout this journey will be used, and enhanced, moving towards my professional career in the computer science field. The challlenges and breakpoints I've faced became staples on my expertise on which I can rely on to approach other similar challenges. This is because the adaptation to problem solving and creative measures for improvement were always present whenever an exemplar challenge presented itself. The foundation of overcoming simple-to-complex tasks was easier said than done, and required extensive levels of research, practice and innovation methods. This is the kind of passion and dedication that most employers look for and I aim to demonstrate these characteristics with my ePortfolio. Even though this computer science degree journey has been difficult and extensive, it has only motivated me to keep learning, practicing, and take full advantage of basic programming principles, as with creativity, innovation, and preparation we can elevate simple programming artifacts into intuitive and complex digital systems. All of the referred artifacts, documentation and code reviews are attached in this repository.

# Additional Information: Tools Used
- EclipseIDE 2024 (Java, JSP, HTML)
- MySQL Workbench 8.0 CE
- Tomcat v7.0 Server
- ChatGPT 4.0(For Code Cleaning Purposes Only)
